Theory: API Specifications (#3)
apisyouwonthate/book-build-apis-2: 1-theory/3-api-contracts.adoc

= API Contracts

> The "I" means interface, and so writing a contract for that interface is the act of writing down what that interface is going to look like, to avoid folks having to guess, or go and hunt for some documentation somewhere.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "I" in "API" means interface, and so writing a contract for that interface is the act of writing down what that interface is going to look like, to avoid folks having to guess, or go and hunt for some documentation somewhere.
```

Let's use the fantastic https://pokeapi.co/[PokeAPI] as an example.

[source,javascript]
----
{
  "id": 12,
  "name": "butterfree",
  "base_experience": 178,
  "height": 11,
  "is_default": true,
  "order": 16,
  "weight": 320,
  "abilities": [{
    "is_hidden": true,
    "slot": 3
  }]
}
----

If we look just at the data, we can deduce that sure, ID is probably an auto-incrementing identifier, the name seems to be a lower-cased English string, but after that it starts getting a bit odd.

Height and weight, I guess there is no imperial and metric in the game just units, but what is order all about? The order that pokemon is sat in my current party? That Ash bumped into in the cartoon? In order of cuteness? What?!

An API contract can help answer most of the questions and more for anyone wanting to understand how an API is meant to work.

- Which resources or methods are available and how do you interact with them?

> - Which HTTP endpoints are required for that endpoint, for things like authentication?

Reviewer: Do you mean "Which HTTP endpoints are related to that endpoint, for things like authentication?" (eg. auth to  token) or "Which HTTP endpoints require authentication"? Or something else?

Author: Ha, "Which HTTP **headers** are required for that endpoint, for things like authentication?" :)

- Which properties are available in the request and response?
- What are those various properties data types?
- Which of those properties are required or optional?
- What other validation rules can be applied to those properties?

[quote, The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language]
____
A contract is an agreement between two or more parties, especially one that is written and enforceable by law.
____

Thinking about writing an API contract might sound a bit odd if you just think about an API as sharing some data or as a convenient way to trigger commands on another server, but people need to know what that data is, or what arguments they should send to those commands.

> The enforceable bit is important too. We can use our contracts in our test suite to confirm that our actual APIs are following the rules of the contract.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The enforceable bit is important too. We can use those contracts in our test suite to confirm that our actual APIs are following the rules of the contract.
```

Reviewer: (or something that would get rid of some of the `our`s)

NOTE: Some people use the term "API Specifications" to describe all this, but the word "specification" is used to mean a lot of different things. We just used it in the last chapter for something totally different, so let's stick to API Contracts to avoid confusion.

> Written down exactly from an early point (and agreed upon) means that there are far fewer surprises throughout the API lifecycle, from planning, through development, and into usage by clients.

Reviewer: I would move this sentence right after the list below, before `This confidence...`. Seems a bit random after the `NOTE:` bit.

Having a good contract means that API developers can be confident that:

1. The interface is doing what they intend
2. The interface is going to be useful for client developers
3. The interface is understood well by client developers
4. The interface is not changing accidentally when code changes

> This confidence will save a lot of time and money for whoever is building this API, as a lack of confidence in those things leads to slower rollout of the initial version, loads more time spent testing subsequent deployments, and wasted developer time having loads of meetings to explain things that could have been written down and clear to everyone already.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This confidence will save everyone a lot of time, money and frustration. Having no contract in place leads to slower rollout of the initial version, loads more time spent testing subsequent deployments, and wasted developer time having loads of meetings to explain things that could have been written down and clear to everyone already.
```
Just an idea to avoid repeating `confidence`.

== What forms can an API Contract take?

Some folks might think "That sounds like documentation", others might think "That sounds like tests". The answer is both, and more.

An API Contract can exist in several forms, some more useful than others.

=== The Dreaded Verbal Contract

A common case is the verbal contract, where the API developers discuss it with the frontend or other client application developers as they go. The backend developers write their code, the client developers write theirs, and as various endpoints or propereties are conceived, they are explained somehow: literally explained out loud over the conference room table, shouted over a hail of nerf gun pellets and ping pong, or DMed over Slack chats.

----

> Fred: Hey Sarah, there’s a new "fudge" field and it can be "blah" or "whatever"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fred: Hey Sarah, there’s a new "fudge" field and it can be "blah" or "whatever".
```

== What forms can an API Contract take?

Some folks might think "That sounds like documentation", others might think "That sounds like tests". The answer is both, and more.

An API contract can exist in several forms, some more useful than others.

=== The Dreaded Verbal Contract

A common case is the verbal contract, where the API developers discuss it with the frontend or other client application developers as they go. The backend developers write their code, the client developers write theirs, and as various endpoints or properties are conceived, they are explained somehow: literally explained out loud over the conference room table, shouted over a hail of nerf gun pellets and ping pong, or DMed over Slack chats.

----
Fred: Hey Sarah, there’s a new "fudge" field and it can be "blah" or "whatever"

Sarah: Great! Thanks I’ll chuck that in now.
----

This works for a while. The API works, the app runs fine, we're making money, and we’re onto the next thing!

> This method has a huge number, the main being that communication is hard. You never really know if somebody understood what you meant even if they say they did. Beyond that, not having things written down means people can forget. If another client team also needs the information and they ask another client team, they are getting a copy of a copy which might be slightly wrong.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This method has a huge number of downsides, the main being that communication is hard. You never really know if somebody understood what you meant even if they say they did. Beyond that, not having things written down means people can forget. If another client team also needs the information and they ask another client team, they are getting a copy of a copy which might be slightly wrong.
```

I feel like there should be some kind of a bridge between this paragraph and the previous sentence. Otherwise you're saying "this works" and then "this has a huge number of downsides" without a "but" in between. If that makes sense?

Another outcome is the original author(s) cannot remember the exact rules, leading to time wasted checking the code. An even worse scenario is that the original author(s) are not reachable for some reason. Maybe the whole team of developers who worked on that API are all on a flight together from New York to Uruguay, and for that entire 9 hour flight nobody can get any answers about how the API is supposed to work, so they're stuck not being able to fix a production issue...

> In this instance two common things happen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When folks rely on a verbal contract, two common things happen.
```

1. Developers waste time writing a new endpoint out of fear of using the old one
2. Developers waste time trying to guess the contract, and might guess wrong

=== Shoddy Human Contracts

> When folks first start thinking about contracts, it often takes the form of rudimentary API Reference Documentation. This might be dumped into a Google Doc, shoved in a wiki, or written up in finger blistering HTML. These formats are usually fairly painstaking to create, because you are focusing on formatting _and_ content, shuffling things around whenever you remember that you should list headers too, and copying and pasting examples of JSON which might change over time. API Developers would not settle for writing software like this, but apparently when it comes to documentation it's accepted as the norm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When folks first start thinking about contracts, it often takes the form of rudimentary API Reference Documentation. This might be dumped into a Google Doc, shoved in a wiki, or written up in finger blistering HTML. These formats are usually fairly painstaking to create, because you are focusing on formatting _and_ content, shuffling things around whenever you remember that you should list headers too, and copying and pasting examples of JSON which might change over time. API developers would not settle for writing software like this, but apparently when it comes to documentation it's accepted as the norm.
```

> This whole slow, manual approach is probably why many people forgo writing contracts this way, and opt for verbal contracts instead.It probably would not be a huge jump to say the "startup mindset" (and "agile") are one of a few potential driving factors in this "just get on with it" approach. There are many technical leaders inexperienced in this area telling their team "We'll write lovely docs later when we've got more time!" , without realizing their lack of clarity is slowing down initial development, client integrations, increasing testing efforts, and causing bizarre production issues and throughout their ecosystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This whole slow, manual approach is probably why many people forgo writing contracts entirely, or opt for verbal contracts instead. It probably would not be a huge jump to say the "startup mindset" (and "agile") are one of a few potential driving factors in this "just get on with it" approach. There are many technical leaders inexperienced in this area telling their team "We'll write lovely docs later when we've got more time!", without realizing that the lack of clarity is slowing down initial development, client integrations, increasing testing efforts, and causing bizarre production issues throughout their ecosystem.
```

> .It's pretty common to blame REST for not forcing a type system onto everyone involved in the API, but they're absolutely useable. Don't blame a paradigm for implementation level decisions.

Reviewer: Don't think this comment / image belongs here? Sounds like something for the "paradigms" section?

Author: I wanted to work that meme in somewhere, I'll find somewhere else.

image::./images/contracts-unspecified-json.jpeg[A cyclist jams a stick into hisi spokes then complains about it. A pretty accurate metaphor for using unspecified JSON in a REST API then blaming REST for it.]

> Anyway, despite being this medium of API contracts being time consuming, it is also impossible to enforce. After you have spent the time writing up a Google Docs/HTML/Wiki, the only output of that is going to be... a Google Doc/HTML/Wiki and maybe a PDF if you want to go wild. You can't exactly jam that Google Doc into an API test suite and have it confirm that the API is conforming to whatever is written in there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Anyway, aside from this medium of API contracts being time consuming, it is also impossible to enforce. After you have spent the time writing up a Google Docs/HTML/Wiki, the only output of that is going to be... a Google Doc/HTML/Wiki and maybe a PDF if you want to go wild. You can't exactly jam that Google Doc into an API test suite and have it confirm that the API is conforming to whatever is written in there.
```

There is another way.

=== Description Languages

> A description language can be a programming language based, or text based format which lets you describe an API in a reusable format. This reusable format means you can do a whole bunch of stuff:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A description language can be text based or look a bit like a programming language. This format lets you describe an API in a reusable way, which means you can do a whole bunch of stuff:
```

Or something to avoid saying `format` 3x...

Reviewer 2: Replace 

This format lets you...

The language allows you to describe an API in a reusable way that can aid in:

- Documentation
- Client-side validation
- Server-side validation
- Client-library Generation (SDKs)
- UI Generation
- Server/Application generation
- Mock servers
- Contract testing

> SOAP as been mentioned as one system that used to have meta-data which described its methods and messages using something called a WSDL:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SOAP has been mentioned as one system that used to have meta-data which described its methods and messages using something called a WSDL:
```

I feel like there could be a better segway into the WSDL, something like "An [early] example of that would be SOAP, which used something called a WSDL to provide meta-data describing its methods and messages:"

[quote, Wikipedia]
----
The Web Services Description Language is an XML-based interface definition language that is used for describing the functionality offered by a web service. The acronym is also used for any specific WSDL description of a web service, which provides a machine-readable description of how the service can be called, what parameters it expects, and what data structures it returns. Therefore, its purpose is roughly similar to that of a type signature in a programming language.
----

WSDLs were only used for SOAP, and not many paradigms or implementations seemed to bother with this sort of description language for a long time. Luckily that has all changed over the last few years.

> ==== Endpoint-based APIs

Reviewer: This might just be me not knowing things, but what do you mean by "Endpoint-based APIs"? Are there any APIs which are not endpoint-based? (genuine question, or my brain is tired and I'm missing something obvious :P). This is the first time this term is used so might be worth clarifying?

In the endpoint-based API world there were a few such as https://apiblueprint.org/[API Blueprint], https://raml.org/[RAML], and Swagger, but for years the tooling was a bit lacking, and mostly only allowed for outputting as documentation. In 2018 one description language settled the mainstream favourite, and that was OpenAPI v3.0.

> ----

Reviewer: Just a thought that "OpenAPI" doesn't pop up anywhere in your table of contents, and it might be something folks actively look for?

The OpenAPI Specification (OAS) defines a standard, programming language-agnostic interface description for REST APIs, which allows both humans and computers to discover and understand the capabilities of a service without requiring access to source code, additional documentation, or inspection of network traffic.
----

> OpenAPI is slowly becoming the go-to description language for writing "endpoint-based API" contracts, and you will come to see why as OpenAPI pops up in pretty much every part of this book. Planning, design, testing, management, you name it, OpenAPI can help out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenAPI is slowly becoming the go-to description language for writing "endpoint-based API" contracts, and you will come to see why as it pops up in pretty much every part of this book. Planning, design, testing, management, you name it, OpenAPI can help out.
```

> Another popular language is http://json-schema.org/[JSON Schema], which parts of OpenAPI are based on, and mostly compatible with.

Reviewer: This seems a bit random here, so I would combine it / add it to the paragraph that starts on l. 123, before you fully  dive into OpenAPI?

[source,yaml]
----
openapi: 3.0.2
info:
  title: Cat on the Hat API
  version: 1.0.0
  description: The API for selling hats with pictures of cats.
servers:
  - url: "https://hats.example.com"
    description: Production server
  - url: "https://hats-staging.example.com"
    description: Staging server

paths:
  /hats:
    get:
      description: Returns all hats from the system that the user has access to
      responses:
        '200':
          description: A list of hats.
          content:
            application/json:
              schema:
                $ref: '#/components/schemas/hats'

components:
  schemas:
    hats:
      type: array
      items:
        $ref: "#/components/schemas/hat"

    hat:
      type: object
      properties:
        id:
          type: string
          format: uuid
        name:
          type: enum
          enum:
            - bowler
            - top
            - fedora
----

OpenAPI is a YAML or JSON based descriptive language which covers endpoints, headers, requests and responses, allows for examples in different mime types, outlines errors, and even lets developers write in potential values, validation rules, etc.

> These OpenAPI contract files are usually static, usually written down along with the source code, then sometimes deployed to a file hosting like S3 for folks to use. Some managers want to treat these like business secrets and hide them under lock and key, which makes absolutely no damned sense as they are meta-data only. Most "hackers" could probably figure out that you keep your list of companies under `GET /companies`, so just don't make that a publicly available endpoint and you're gonna be ok. PayPal, Microsoft, and other companies make these OpenAPI contracts available to anyone who wants to download them, and this can help folks integrate with your APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenAPI contract files are usually static. They're usually written down along with the source code, then sometimes deployed to a file hosting service like S3 for folks to use. Some managers want to treat these like business secrets and hide them under lock and key, which makes absolutely no damned sense as they are meta-data only. Most "hackers" could probably figure out that you keep your list of companies under `GET /companies`, so just don't make that a publicly available endpoint and you're gonna be ok. PayPal, Microsoft, and other companies make their OpenAPI contracts available to anyone who wants to download them, and this approach can help folks integrate with your APIs.
```

> You can imagine an OpenAPI file growing to be rather unwieldy once its got 50+ endpoints and more complex examples, but have no fear you can spread things around in multiple files to make it a lot more DRY (Don't Repeat Yourself) and useful. The first thing to go is usually the `components.schema` definitions, which can be moved to their own files. These files are essentially JSON Schema, so you can have the best of both worlds using both OpenAPI and JSON Schema for various things.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can imagine an OpenAPI file growing to be rather unwieldy once it's got 50+ endpoints and more complex examples, but have no fear. You can spread things around in multiple files to make it a lot more DRY (Don't Repeat Yourself) and useful. The first thing to go is usually the `components.schema` definitions, which can be moved to their own files. These files are essentially JSON Schema, so you can have the best of both worlds using both OpenAPI and JSON Schema for various things.
```

Just an observation that you haven't explained what `JSON Schema` is thus far, so suddenly referring to that might be a bit of a surprise?  You also mention it earlier when introducing OpenAPI and in the next paragraph, so maybe it's worth adding a quick section on JSON Schema before you go into OpenAPI? ¯\_(ツ)_/¯

> It's quite common to then also make the JSON Schema files available over the wire, by putting links to the static .json files in a HTTP response header. This can provide more information about the object to the API client without needing to figure out how to distribute the files to them ahead of time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's quite common to then also make the JSON Schema files available over the wire, by putting links to the static .json files in an HTTP response header. This can provide more information about the object to the API client without needing to figure out how to distribute the files to them ahead of time.
```

> ==== GraphQL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== GraphQL Schemas
```

Reviewer: ^ ignore

  id: ID!
  name: String!
  friends: [Character]
  appearsIn: [Episode]!
}

type Human implements Character {
  id: ID!
  name: String!
  friends: [Character]
  appearsIn: [Episode]!
  starships: [Starship]
  totalCredits: Int
}

type Droid implements Character {
  id: ID!
  name: String!
  friends: [Character]
  appearsIn: [Episode]!
  primaryFunction: String
}
----

These schemas can be defined in whatever programming language the API is built in: JavaScript, PHP, Go, whatever, but they are usually not written in one definitive format. That makes portability a little funky (you couldn't give a Go defined schema to a JavaScript client), but not impossible.

GraphQL schema does not support validation being defined in the contract like OpenAPI and JSON Schema, but there are some extensions floating around which can help. More on all of that later.

==== gRPC

gRPC uses another Google tool for its API contract: https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/[Protobuf]. Protobuf is basically a serializer for data going over the wire. Much like GraphQL and its schemas, Protobuf is integral to gRPC. Instead of schemas they call them "Message Types", but it's all the same sort of idea.

> Instead of writing them in whatever language the API is written in (like GraphQL), a new  `.proto` file is written using https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/proto[Protocol Buffer Language Syntax]. This C-family/Java style language exists solely for writing these files. It might be a bit of a pain to figure out a brand new syntax, ut it has the benefit of being fairly portable as you can read them in multiple languages. Finding a JavaScript, Ruby, Python, Go, etc. tool that can read a `.proto` file is a whole lot easier than trying to get Python to read something written in  - for example - JavaScript.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of writing them in whatever language the API is written in (like GraphQL), a new  `.proto` file is written using https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/proto[Protocol Buffer Language Syntax]. This C-family/Java style language exists solely for writing these files. It might be a bit of a pain to figure out a brand new syntax, but it has the benefit of being fairly portable as you can read them in multiple languages. Finding a JavaScript, Ruby, Python, Go, etc. tool that can read a `.proto` file is a whole lot easier than trying to get Python to read something written in  - for example - JavaScript.
```

Rarely are `.proto` files made available over a URL, they are usually bundled and distributed with client code. Then usually things are kept backwards compatible until the clients have upgraded whatever client code brought the `.proto` files their way.

== Service Model & Data Model

> Two terms that pop up from time to time as "service model" and "data model". These are two ways to specify which part of the API contract you are talking about.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two terms that pop up from time to time are "service model" and "data model". These are two ways to specify which part of the API contract you are talking about.
```

gun pellets and ping pong, or DMed over Slack chats.

----
Fred: Hey Sarah, there’s a new "fudge" field and it can be "blah" or "whatever".

Sarah: Great! Thanks I’ll chuck that in now.
----

This might seem good enough as the API works API works, the app runs fine, we're
making money, and may even be making money. Sadly this method has a bunch of
downsides

The primary issue is that communication is hard. You never really know if
somebody understood what you meant even if they say they did.

Beyond that, not having things written down means people can forget. If another
client team also needs the information and they ask another client team, they
are getting a copy of a copy which might be slightly wrong.

Another outcome is the original author(s) cannot remember the exact rules,
leading to time wasted checking the code. An even worse scenario is that the
original author(s) are not reachable for some reason. Maybe the whole team of
developers who worked on that API are all on a flight together from New York to
Uruguay, and for that entire 9 hour flight nobody can get any answers about how
the API is supposed to work, so they're stuck not being able to fix a production

> issue...

Author: Ah yeah I was going to mention that then got lost in the Uruguay story :D

for writing "endpoint-based API" contracts, and you will come to see why as it
pops up in pretty much every part of this book. Planning, design, testing,
management, you name it, OpenAPI can help out.

.An overly simplified example of OpenAPI describing an API which lists collections and resources of hats.
[source,yaml]
----
openapi: 3.0.2
info:
  title: Cat on the Hat API
  version: 1.0.0
  description: The API for selling hats with pictures of cats.
servers:
  - url: "https://hats.example.com"
    description: Production server
  - url: "https://hats-staging.example.com"
    description: Staging server

paths:
  /hats:
    get:
      description: Returns all hats from the system that the user has access to
      responses:
        '200':
          description: A list of hats.
          content:
            application/json:
              schema:
                $ref: '#/components/schemas/hats'

components:
  schemas:
    hats:
      type: array
      items:
        $ref: "#/components/schemas/hat"

    hat:
      type: object
      properties:
        id:
          type: string
          format: uuid
        name:

>           type: enum

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
          type: string
```

There is no `enum` type. At least swagger editor fails on this line stating:

> Structural error at components.schemas.hat.properties.name.type
should be equal to one of the allowed values
allowedValues: array, boolean, integer, number, object, string

type of this property is `string` but validation rule is made by enum only allowing the listed values.

          enum:
            - bowler
            - top
            - fedora
----

OpenAPI is a YAML or JSON based descriptive language which covers endpoints,
headers, requests and responses, allows for examples in different mime types,
outlines errors, and even lets developers write in potential values, validation
rules, etc.

OpenAPI can describe both service and data model. In the example above,
everything under `paths` is describing the service model, then everything under

> `components.schema` is describing data model. The schema keywords that OpenAPI

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`components.schemas` is describing the data model. The schema keywords that OpenAPI
```

v3.0 uses are based on JSON Schema, and there is a bit of a tangent we should
look into here about compatibility.

[[WARNING]]
====
OpenAPI v3.0 schema objects are a subset/superset/sideset implementation of

> _JSON Schema draft 05_. Most JSON Schema keywords as expected, a few extra

Reviewer 3: "Most JSON Schema keywords as expected" - something is missing here.

first article] fully explains the situation, and
https://blog.apisyouwonthate.com/openapi-and-json-schema-divergence-part-2-52e282e06a05[this
second article] explains workarounds and longer term solutions.
====

OpenAPI contract files are usually static. They're usually written down along
with the source code, then sometimes deployed to a file hosting service like S3
for folks to use. Some managers want to treat these like business secrets and
hide them under lock and key, which makes absolutely no damned sense as they are
meta-data only. Most "hackers" could probably figure out that you keep your list
of companies under `GET /companies`, so just don't make that a publicly
available endpoint and you're gonna be ok. PayPal, Microsoft, and other
companies make their OpenAPI contracts available to anyone who wants to download
them, and this approach can help folks integrate with your APIs.

You can imagine an OpenAPI file growing to be rather unwieldy once its got 50+
endpoints and more complex examples, but have no fear you can spread things
around in multiple files to make it a lot more DRY (Don't Repeat Yourself) and

> useful. The first thing to go is usually the `components.schema` definitions,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
useful. The first thing to go is usually the `components.schemas` definitions,
```

which can be moved to their own files. Once these are split into their own
files, an extra step can be taken to turn them into proper JSON Schema files.
Once they are split out they can be referenced in a HTTP response header.

[source]
----
Link: <http://example.com/schemas/hat.json#>; rel="describedby"
----

When a client sees this they can use it for all sorts of things - like form
generation and client-side validation - all without needing to figure out how to
distribute the files to them ahead of time.

==== GraphQL Schemas

GraphQL as an implementation comes bundled with
https://graphql.org/learn/schema/[GraphQL Schemas]. GraphQL does not really have

> a service model, as it does not need one. All interactions operate under a

Author: Fair points! I think I made the "it can be anywhere including AMQP but in HTTP land its usually just a POST endpoint" in the paradigms & implementations chapter. :)

> a service model, as it does not need one. All interactions operate under a

Author: Ah no found a way to improve it. Great feedback.
